docs: Multi-port and catalog changes (#19050)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/k8s/multiport/configure.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Configure multi-port services 
description: Learn how to enable the v2 catalog and configure services to support multiple ports in Consul on Kubernetes. You can configure multiple ports on a single service or multiple services and ports in a single container.
---

# Configure multi-port services

<Warning>

Multi-port services are part of a beta release. This documentation supports testing and development scenarios. Do not use multi-port services or the v2 catalog API in secure production environments.

</Warning>

This page describes the process for integrating a service that uses multiple ports in a single container when running Consul on Kubernetes deployments. It includes example configurations to demonstrate an end-to-end deployment test of Consul's multi-port features.

## Prerequisites

Registering multi-port services with Consul requires Kubernetes. Multi-port services are not supported on VM deployments.

There are also software version prerequisites:

- `consul` v1.17.0

> - `consul-k8s` v1.1.0+ or Consul Helm chart release v1.1.0+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `consul-k8s` CLI v1.3.0+ or `consul-k8s` Helm chart release v1.3.0+
```

Configuring multi-port services for service discovery does not have additional prerequisites.

Consul’s transparent proxy for service mesh, which enables Kube DNS instead of Consul DNS through permissive mTLS settings, has additional prerequisites. For more information about the steps to configure global settings and enable permissive mTLS mode before registering a service, refer to the [onboard services in transparent mode workflow](/consul/docs/k8s/connect/onboarding-tproxy-mode#workflow).

## Enable the v2 catalog

To enable the v2 catalog and its support for multi-port services, set `global.experiments: ["resource-apis"]`. The following example includes this parameter in a Helm chart with minimal required configurations for the Consul installation:

<CodeBlockConfig name="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
  enabled: true
  name: consul

>   image: hashicorp/consul:1.17.0-rc1

Reviewer: That is the correct name that I can recall.

---
layout: docs
page_title: Configure multi-port services 
description: Learn how to enable the v2 catalog and configure services to support multiple ports in Consul on Kubernetes. You can configure multiple ports on a single service or multiple services and ports in a single container.
---

# Configure multi-port services

<Warning>

Multi-port services are part of a beta release. This documentation supports testing and development scenarios. Do not use multi-port services or the v2 catalog API in secure production environments.

</Warning>

This page describes the process for integrating a service that uses multiple ports in a single container when running Consul on Kubernetes deployments. It includes example configurations to demonstrate an end-to-end deployment test of Consul's multi-port features.

## Prerequisites

Registering multi-port services with Consul requires Kubernetes. Multi-port services are not supported on VM deployments.

> There are also software version prerequisites:
> 
> - `consul` v1.17.0
> - `consul-k8s` CLI v1.3.0+ or `hashicorp/consul` Helm chart release v1.3.0+
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following software versions are required:

- Consul v1.17.0
- `consul-k8s` CLI v1.3.0+ or `hashicorp/consul` Helm chart release v1.3.0+

```
At least for core Consul, I think we normally refer to the product name in requirements, i.e., "Consul v1.17.0". We've been less consistent with the K8s binary, though. Was your thinking that if we refer to the binary for one requirement in a topic that we should refer to the binary for all requirements in the the topic?

For more information about upgrading versions for `consul-k8s` and Helm charts, refer to [Update the Consul K8s CLI](/consul/docs/k8s/upgrade/upgrade-cli) and [Upgrade Helm chart version](/consul/docs/k8s/upgrade#upgrade-helm-chart-version).

> Consul’s transparent proxy for service mesh, which enables Kube DNS instead of Consul DNS through permissive mTLS settings, has additional prerequisites. For more information about the steps to configure global settings and enable permissive mTLS mode before registering a service, refer to the [onboard services in transparent mode workflow](/consul/docs/k8s/connect/onboarding-tproxy-mode#workflow).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are additional requirements for service mesh proxies in transparent proxy mode. This mode enables queries through Kube DNS instead of Consul DNS over permissive mTLS settings. For more information about the steps to configure global settings and enable permissive mTLS mode before registering a service, refer to the [onboard services in transparent mode workflow](/consul/docs/k8s/connect/onboarding-tproxy-mode#workflow).
```
The way we've described tproxy in the past made it seem like a whole different type of proxy instead of a mode in which SM proxies operate.

## Enable the v2 catalog

To enable the v2 catalog and its support for multi-port services, set `global.experiments: ["resource-apis"]`. The following example includes this parameter in a Helm chart with minimal required configurations for the Consul installation:

<CodeBlockConfig name="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
  enabled: true
  name: consul
  image: hashicorp/consul:1.17.0-rc1
  datacenter: dc1
  tls:
    enabled: true
  experiments: ["resource-apis"]
server:
  enabled: true
  replicas: 1
connectInject:

>   enabled: true

Reviewer 3: Can we add ui.enabled false here?

```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Then install Consul to your Kubernetes cluster using either the `consul-k8s` CLI or Helm.

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="consul-k8s CLI" group="consul-k8s">

```shell-session
$ consul-k8s install -config-file=values.yaml
```

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Helm" group="helm">

```shell-session
$ helm install consul hashicorp/consul --create-namespace --namespace consul --values values.yaml
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Define the multi-port service

Consul's v2 catalog supports two methods for defining multi-port services in Kubernetes:

- Method 1: Define a single Kubernetes Service that exposes multiple ports
- Method 2: Define multiple Kubernetes Services that expose individual ports

These methods affect how the Services are addressed in Kubernetes.

> The following example contains two tabs, each with a configuration that defines an `api` service using one of these methods. Both definitions schedule a Pod running two containers, with each container supporting traffic to one of the ports exposed by the Service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each tab in the following example contains a configuration that defines an `api` service using one of these methods. Both definitions schedule a Pod running two containers that each support traffic to one of the ports exposed by the Service.
```
Is that any clearer?

The following examples create Consul CRDs that allow traffic to only one port of the multi-port service. Each resource separately denies `web` permission when it is a source of traffic to one of the services. These traffic permissions work with either method for defining a multi-port service.

<CodeTabs tabs={[ "Deny port 80", "Deny port 90" ]}>

<CodeBlockConfig filename="deny-80.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: auth.consul.hashicorp.com/v2beta1
kind: TrafficPermissions
metadata:
  name: web-to-api-admin-port-allow
spec:
  destination:
    identityName: api
  action: deny
  permissions:
    - sources:
        - identityName: web
      destinationRules:
        - portNames: ["api"]
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

<CodeBlockConfig filename="deny-90.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: auth.consul.hashicorp.com/v2beta1
kind: TrafficPermissions
metadata:
  name: web-to-api-port-allow
spec:
  destination:
    identityName: api
  action: deny
  permissions:
    - sources:
        - identityName: web
      destinationRules:
        - portNames: ["admin"] 
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</CodeTabs>

## Validate multi-port connection

> To open a shell to the `web` container, you need the name of the pod it currently runs on. Run the following command to return a list of pods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To open a shell to the `web` container, you need the name of the Pod it currently runs on. Run the following command to return a list of Pods:
```
I think we used the uppercase spelling throughout this topic.

```shell-session
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
api-7dc9d84f-kfnwz     2/2     Running   0          23s
web-7bc5786747-b5pzl   1/1     Running   0          23s
```

> ### Validate both ports

Reviewer 2: Curious as to why you didn't use an ordered list for each of these procedures. This one in particular seems well-suited for it.

Use the `web` Pod's name to open a shell session and test the `api` service.

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Method 1" group="method1">

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api:80
hello world
```

Then test the `api-admin` service.

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api:90
hello world from 9090 admin
```

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Method 2" group="method2">

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api:80
hello world
```

Then test the `api-admin` service.

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api-admin:90
hello world from 9090 admin
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### Validate port 80

Apply the CRD to allow traffic to port 80 only:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f deny-90.yaml
```

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Method 1" group="method1">

Then, open a shell session in the `web` container and test the `api` service on port 80.

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api:80
hello world
```

> Test the `admin` service on port 90. This command should fail, indicating that the traffic permission is in effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test the `admin` service on port `90`. This command should fail, indicating that the traffic permission is in effect.
```
I think it would be in code font because we're referring to the element on the CLI

```shell-session
$ kubectl exec -it web-7bc5786747-b5pzl -- curl api:90
```

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Method 2" group="method2">

> Then, open a shell session in the `web` container and test the `api` service on port 80.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, open a shell session in the `web` container and test the `api` service on port `80`.
```
I won't change all instances in case you disagree

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Method 1" group="method1">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="api.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: api
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: api
spec:
  selector:
    app: api
  ports:
    - name: api
      port: 80
      targetPort: api
    - name: admin
      port: 90
      targetPort: admin
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: api
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: api
  template:
    metadata:
      name: api
      labels:
        app: api
      annotations:
        "consul.hashicorp.com/mesh-inject": "true"
        'consul.hashicorp.com/transparent-proxy': 'true'
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: api

>           image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:alpine
>           args:
>             - -text="hello world"
>             - -listen=:8080
>           ports:
>             - containerPort: 8080
>               name: api
>         - name: api-admin
>           image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:alpine

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:latest
          args:
            - -text="hello world"
            - -listen=:8080
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
              name: api
        - name: api-admin
          image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:latest
```

          args:
            - -text="hello world from 9090 admin"
            - -listen=:9090
          ports:
            - containerPort: 9090
              name: admin
      serviceAccountName: api
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</Tab>

<Tab heading="Method 2" group="method2">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="api.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: api
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: api
spec:
  selector:
    app: api
  ports:
    - name: api
      port: 80
      targetPort: api
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: api-admin
spec:
  selector:
    app: api
  ports:
    - name: admin
      port: 90
      targetPort: admin
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: api
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: api
  template:
    metadata:
      name: api
      labels:
        app: api
      annotations:
        "consul.hashicorp.com/mesh-inject": "true"
        'consul.hashicorp.com/transparent-proxy': 'true'
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: api

>           image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:alpine
>           args:
>             - -text="hello world"
>             - -listen=:8080
>           ports:
>             - containerPort: 8080
>               name: api
>         - name: api-admin
>           image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:alpine

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:latest
          args:
            - -text="hello world"
            - -listen=:8080
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
              name: api
        - name: api-admin
          image: docker.mirror.hashicorp.services/hashicorp/http-echo:latest
```
